---
layout: post
author: Elsa Gonsiorowski
title: "Checkpoint Description"
category: rio
---

A RIO checkpoint contains LP and event data (along with metadata) captured at the end of a ROSS simulation.
These checkpoints can be used to restart and continue the simulation from where it left off.

## Partitions

RIO takes advantage of the existing ROSS mapping API.
Mainly, each KP in a ROSS PE becomes one partition in the RIO checkpoint.
Be sure to set the correct `g_tw_nkp` value when initializing the simulation.
As long as the lp-to-kp is valid, RIO can easily create many partitions from a single MPI rank.

## Files

To facilitate multi-simulation checkpoint assembly (an advanced feature of RIO), there are many discrete files that make up a single RIO checkpoint.
One file contains a human-readable description of the checkpoint while the remainder of the files contain binary data.
RIO checkpoints are *not* guaranteed to work across different file/operating systems.

### Human-Readable Description

The human-readable checkpoint description file has the extension `.txt`.
This file includes version numbers (Git hashes), date and time of checkpoint creation, CMake build settings, and any command-line/run-time settings.

This file is not parsed by RIO when loading a checkpoint.
Its purpose is to facilitate data preservation and allow a user to restart the checkpointed simulation.

### Partition Metadata 

There is only one partition metadata file, with the extension `.rio-md`.
There are six pieces of metadata information captured for each partition in the checkpoint:

- Partition number (note: the numbering scheme is neither unique nor linear)
- Partition file: which data file contains the partition data
- Partition offset: where the partition data begins within the data file
- Partition size: size of the partition data within the data file
- LP count: number of LPs in the partition
- Event count: number of events in partition

### LP Size Metadata File

There is only one LP metadata file.
It has the extension `.rio-lp`.
Since LPs may be of variable sizes, the size metadata for each LP in the system must be captured.

### LP and Event Data Files

There may be multiple data files.
This number can be configured through the `--io-files=n` command line option and the second argument to the `io_store_checkpoint` function.

Each data file has the extension `.rio-data-n` indicating the data file number.
